---
layout: post
title: "Looking for a job"
date: 2021-08-30
category: last
order: 10
---

## Non-EU Situation
Finding a job in Switzerland as a non-EU national is difficult, because Switzerland is small and there are only a few ultra-specialized jobs. Even receiving an interview invitation is challenging, since most companies ask whether you are authorized to work in Switzerland in their online application forms. Certain companies have federal quotas for appointing foreign citizens in Swiss companies, which means that there are often more jobs available in January than in November or December. However, the EPFL name is very well-reputed internationally, and certainly well-regarded in industry, so don’t let this scare you. :)

Some graduates manage to find a job easier than others, for example if they did an internship or have successfully collaborated with a company during their studies and this company is willing to do the extra paperwork to hire them. Or, if they have connections that can directly recommend them for an interview. For the vast majority, however, the job seeking process remains tough and most non-EU graduates end up leaving Switzerland.

As for when to start looking for a job, the best strategy is to start as early as possible and, ideally, secure an offer before you formally end your PhD studies. In this way, if the company hires you on a long-term contract, they can apply for a type B work permit that would be valid right after your study permit ends.

The alternative is to ask for the 6-month job seeker permit to which non-EU graduates are entitled, during which you can continue to look for a job. This permit, however, neither gives any special rights, nor facilitates the paperwork for obtaining a work permit. On the contrary, this permit is of type L and will reset your residency clock, which means that you will not be eligible for a permanent residence permit (type C) for at least another 5 years.
