---
layout: post
title: "Dates and timeline"
date: 2021-08-30
category: last
order: 3
---

1. If your suggested date of the private defence in ISA is 01.MM.YYYY, you have to have your private defence by the end of the month MM (in the year YYYY). Otherwise you need to ask for the extension. It’s OK to ask for less than half a year extension, but it’s probably good to have a clear picture why you need exactly 3.14 months extension ;) 
1. You have to hand in (electronically) your thesis 5 weeks before the private defence, so you have your final deadline only after you fill in jury proposal
1. This version is not final, but must contain an abstract in some Swiss language, your CV and other annoying things. If you don’t speak any such language, ask your friends/colleagues, there’s always someone willing to translate an abstract.
1. If your defence is successful you have one month applying any corrections the jury had
1. If not, I think it’s 6 months and then you repeat the defence, I’m not sure?
2. After your private defence, remember to send the form to SAC (Doctoral students’ services, not EDIC). You should get from them an email with further details. 
3. Your public defence can be any between one and six months after your private one (given you have passed the private defence)
4. After the private defence, you need to upload the final version of your thesis (and get your supervisors approval) 15 days before the public defence. This is necessary because to get the diploma you need to first aprove the proof (a test print) of your thesis. Repro needs a couple of days to prepare the proof, but the 15 days is to be on the safe side. 
5. You also need to infrom SAC about your public defence at leat 15 days before it. 
6. For non-EU people it may make sense to look for a job before your public defense, to avoid worries about your permit expiring
7. It is up to your supervisor how long you contract will last. In most cases, your contract can be extended moth or more after you finish your PhD. You can then help younger PhDs and search for a job comfortabely. However, EPFL only require that you are paid until your **private** defence, so you might want to discuss that with your supervisor. 
8. After your public defence, you *should* have access to EPFL email and so to all services for six months. 

