---
layout: post
title: "Shopping"
date: 2021-08-31
category: life
order: 4
---

Switzerland historically has two main grocery chains, Coop and Migros, and a lot of small local stores. Recently, other chains have appeared, such as Aldi and Lidl.

## Supermarkets

Note that in Swiss supermarkets, you weigh your own vegetables/fruits unless they are sold by the item (such as lemons).
Each label for items sold by weight has a number, which you input into the scales to get a barcode sticker that you stick on the bag with the veggies.


### Coop

One of Switzerland's two historical supermarket chains. Compared to Migros, they have a wider variety of brands but fewer store brands.
They have a rewards program named "Supercard" with which you earn 1 point for each franc spent, and you can use their Supercard app to turn 100 points into CHF 1.
The Supercard app also gives you a lot of vouchers for reduced prices or more points, and sometimes games for free items or vouchers.
They also have a "Hello Family" clun open to everyone, even single people, which gives even more vouchers and typically better ones, such as 20% off all frozen stuff.

Their [website](https://coop.ch) is available in English, French, German, and Italian.


### Migros

One of Switzerland's two historical supermarket chains. Compared to Coop, they have more of their own brands but fewer other brands.
They have a rewards program named "Cumulus" with which you earn 1 point for each franc spent, and every month they convert your points to vouchers where 500 points is CHF 5.
They also have an app with some vouchers for reduced prices or more points, and sometimes games for free items or vouchers.

Their [website](https://migros.ch) is only available in French, German, and Italian.


### Aligro

A "cash and carry" restaurant supply store chain with one location in Chavannes, close to EPFL.
This is the closest to a restaurant supply store that you, a non-restaurant person, can get.
Some of the stuff is worth it, some not; they have a wide variety of certain things and a weird lack of other things.
You can check their current sales (2000/week) on their website, don’t forget to go into the filter and uncheck the “main sales only” box.
Surprisingly, their website only has the sales, so if you want to know what they have you must either go there or watch the sales page for some weeks in a row.

Their [website](https://aligro.ch) is only available in French and German.


### Globus

A small luxury supermarket chain with one location in Lausanne.
They are far more expensive than the others, but have products that you may not find elsewhere.

Their [website](https://globus.ch) is only available in French and German.


### Specialty stores

- Asian: Jehanathan Sàrl has 2 locations:
  - Avenue de France 2, 1004 Lausanne
  - Avenue de la Rapille 12, 1008 Prilly

If you know a good one, please submit a pull request!


### Others

More info is needed on this guide about:

- Manor
- Aldi
- Lidl
- Denner

If you have specific information about any of these, please submit a pull request!


## Online shops

### Toppreise

Know what you want but not sure who has the lowest price? [Toppreise](https://toppreise.ch/) is your friend, available in English, French, and German.
Sometimes this will be some obscure Swiss-German website, but if it has a good seller rating on Toppreise you should be fine.


### Galaxus / Digitec

Switzerland's replacement for Amazon, essentially.
Originally a PC gaming store by the name of Digitec, they have expanded under the name of Galaxus, though computer stuff is still sold as Digitec.
Note that the non-computer stuff has a minimum of 50.- per order, below which you will be charged a fixed 9.- fee.
You can either get it delivered to your place, or go pick it up at their store in Malley.

Their [website](https://galaxus.ch) is available in English, French, German, and Italian.


### Amazon

There is no amazon.ch, but [amazon.fr](https://amazon.fr) and [amazon.de](https://amazon.de) do ship most of their items, sometimes even with free shipping.


### Specialty stores

If you want stuff not typically available in Swiss supermarkets, such as food and ingredients from outside of Europe, the following websites may be of interest:

- [Clicknpick](https://cnpmarket.ch/) has Southern and Eastern Asian food, and some health/beauty items
- [Hethey](https://hethey.ch/) has African, East Asian, Indian, Mexican, and Latin American items, as well as food including fresh products
- [La Cucina](https://lacucina.ch/) has loose leaf teas, spices, and related equipment
- [Logam](https://logam.ch/) has Southern and Eastern Asian food, and some health/beauty items

If you know a good one, please submit a pull request!

### QoQa

Every day or so, QoQa has a limited-time offer. They have multiple websites for different things, such as Qsport and Qooking.
Sometimes it's worth it, sometimes not.


### Shops shipping from outside of Switzerland

Be careful with customs duties on packages coming from outside of Switzerland:
- No customs duties if the value of the package is under CHF 60
- Otherwise, you will pay the Swiss VAT plus  a fixed administration fee charged by the transporter (e.g. CHF 20)
- On the other hand, you can get foreign VAT reimbursed, which is typically higher than the Swiss VAT



## Furniture

### IKEA

IKEA. What else is there to say? It's IKEA! They have furniture and meatballs.
If furnishing an entire apartment, it’s possible to go to IKEA, make a list of all the furniture you need, drop the list at the entrance and get everything delivered.


### Conforama

Just don’t. Very poor quality. Go to IKEA instead. Please.


## Second-hand marketplaces

* Ricardo
* Anibis
* Facebook Marketplace
* Facebook group for EPFL

If you have specific information about any of these, please submit a pull request!
