---
layout: post
title: "Money and Savings"
date: 2021-08-30
category: life
order: 9
---

## Pay
The pay for PhD students is set at the federal level. As of 2021, it is 52,400 CHF/year for the first year, and increases by 1,000 CHF/year in each of the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th years. ([source](https://inside.epfl.ch/internalhr/fr/prestationsrh/salaires/forfaits/))

In practice, there are three factors to take into account: taxes already deducted from your salary, taxes you have to pay at the end of the year, and the 13th salary.

If you have a B permit, you pay taxes directly on your salary. This is convenient, as you don’t need to do anything; however, it’s worth checking what deductions could apply to you, as the taxes taken out of your salary assume some defaults. For instance, if you pay into a 3rd pillar (see below), you can get a tax refund.
Otherwise, only some basic stuff is taken out of your salary directly, including the first pillar (see below), and you pay some money each month to cover the expected tax amount. Then, at the end of the year, two options are possible:
* With a B permit, a net worth < 50k CHF and yearly income < 120k CHF: file nothing. This means you implicitly accept the default deductions and you have nothing more to declare. The money taken out of your salary each month paid for income taxes.
* Otherwise: you have to report your effective income, wealth, and deductions at the end of the year. This is done using a piece of software called VaudTax, it’s basically a big form whose data you can export each year so you only fill in what changed. After a little delay, a taxation decision will be made and you get refunded or charged depending on whether your installments were too much or too little. 

The 13th salary system means that your salary is split into 13 and you get 1/13th each month, with the last 1/13th being given to you partly in November and partly in December. The origins of this system are historically not so clear, but nowadays it’s basically a way for you to pay for Christmas presents and such.

Overall, expect to get around 3,200 CHF/month after all taxes starting in the first year, plus the 13th salary. Here's an example breakdown for a first year PhD salary **as of September 2017** (the gross salary will have slightly changed since then):

| Gross salary                                              | 3,930.80 CHF |  
| First pillar (AHV/AVS)                                    | -201.45 CHF  | 
| Various other deductions                                  | -88.15 CHF   |
| Second pillar (Publica)                                   | -137.10 CHF  | 
| Income tax withholding with default (generous) deductions | -279.50 CHF  | 
| Net income                                                | 3,224.60 CHF |  

## First pillar
Mandatory retirement savings, taken out of the salary, as a global pool for everyone. Called “AVS”. Equivalent to “social security”.

## Second pillar
Mandatory retirement savings, taken out of the salary, for yourself. Provider is always [Publica](https://publica.ch/) for EPFL employees.
Money is blocked until retirement or “permanently” leaving the country.

## Third pillar
Optional retirement savings for yourself. The money contributed to the Pillar 3a can be deducted from income for tax purposes. Capped to about CHF 7000 per year (the exact amount increases slightly every year). You can view this as an investment with a guaranteed ~ 15% return since you put in 7k/year and get ~ 1k/year less tax as a result.

Money is blocked until retirement, “permanently” leaving the country, buying a house or starting to work as an independent. At withdrawal, a progressive tax rate is applied depending on the capital amount and your canton of residence. ([source](https://finpension.ch/en/capital-withdrawal-tax-compared/))

You get to choose where you invest, so it can be a near-zero-return but safe option (e.g. 100% cash), or up to 100% in stocks with e.g. some of VIAC or PostFinance 3rd pillar options. 
Make sure you compare fees before choosing a solution: keeping it in cash should be free everywhere, but if you want to invest, your bank’s offering probably won’t be the cheapest.

In general, it’s not worth it to subscribe to a joint life insurance / third pillar product (a.k.a. “Pillar 3b”), even though salespeople may try to convince you otherwise.

## Tax Refund
If you are a B permit holder, you are then eligible for a tax refund from the Canton de Vaud.

The deadline for submitting your refund request for the fiscal year 2020 is set to March 31st, 2021. Below you find the necessary links and forms for you to proceed with a refund.

(The documents for the fiscal year 2020 are now available)

* [PolyDoc Committee’s page on Tax Refunds](https://www.epfl.ch/campus/associations/list/polydoc/my-phd-life/practical-life/finances/)
* [Instructions for tax declaration-B Permit Holders.pdf](https://www.epfl.ch/campus/associations/list/polydoc/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/Instructions-for-tax-declaration-B-Permit-Holders.pdf)
* [Form “Avis d’Imposition à la source” (Cantonal Form for tax deduction) to fill out](https://www.vd.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/organisation/dfin/aci/fichiers_pdf/21570_DIS_formulaire.pdf)
* [Webpage from canton de Vaud on the tax deduction](https://www.vd.ch/themes/etat-droit-finances/impots/pour-les-employeurs/impot-a-la-source/personnes-imposees-a-la-source-sourciers/)

The instructions for tax declaration is based on a model from 2016, but is still valid. The form has changed slightly, but is still very similar. In the Canton de Vaud Webpage, you are concerned by the section “Contestation et demande de rectification des retenues d’impôt à la source (déclaration d’impôt simplifiée)”

Please note that certain numbers may have changed concerning third pillar and public transport deductions. Find the latest numbers in the [instruction document for this year](https://www.vd.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/organisation/dfin/aci/fichiers_pdf/21569_IG_DIS_2020.pdf).

Also note that one must take télétravail into account when declaring your transportation and food deductions. You cannot claim meals eaten at home as “repas hors domicile” and you cannot claim transport costs for days that you did not commute to work.

You can send back the filled out documents to:

Administration Cantonale des impôts<br/>
Section de l’impôt à la source<br/>
Rue Caroline 9 bis<br/>
1014 Lausanne<br/>

## Bank accounts
Go with whichever Swiss bank you want, they’re all more or less equal, and will have free accounts for students. The main question is whether you want a more traditional account or an app-based one like CSX or Yuh.
If you are a US citizen, the process will be more complex due to Swiss banks having to report your data to the US.

Switzerland as a whole is in the process of moving away from Maestro for debit cards and towards Debit MasterCard/Visa, but until that is finished (2022?) depending on your bank you may need to get a credit card just so you can do online shopping, without actually using the credit part. Generally, it’s possible to pay for almost everything by card (cashless).

Do not expect any yields from non-investment bank accounts, even the savings ones, due to negative interest rates on CHF

## Checks
Don’t. It is possible to cash checks, but this has large fees, because nobody uses them in Switzerland.

## Transferring money to & from abroad
While it is possible to make a direct bank transfer from anywhere to Switzerland, that could result in large transfer and currency conversion fees. A cheaper way is to use a service such as [Wise](https://wise.com/) (formerly Transferwise), where fees are small and known upfront.

Wise and Revolut both offer payment cards that can be used in any country and for online shopping with cheap / free currency conversion.

## Interesting discounts for PhDs
One of the advantages of the PhD status is that you still are a student! Beyond staying at university, this also means that you can claim discounts in many different stores and restaurants.

This page aims at listing various discount opportunities. Any extra suggestions are of course welcome, by mail or through our WishBox.

* The [CAMIPRO webpage](https://camipro.epfl.ch/external_advantages) lists various discounts opportunities outside EPFL, including car rentals, sports equipment, cinemas and more.
* EPFL subsidizes monthly or yearly travel passes for public transports. On myCAMIPRO, EPFL employees can get up to a [25% discount coupon](https://mycamipro.epfl.ch/client/mobilisreq) on transport passes. It will be valid when purchasing your pass in a point of sale (SBB, TL, ...) nearby.
* The [SBB seven25 Travelcard](https://www.sbb.ch/en/travelcards-and-tickets/railpasses/seven25-travelcard.html) allows people under 25 to enjoy unlimited travel anywhere in Switzerland from 7pm to 5am for only 390 CHF/year

## Sesame, EPFL’s financial online portal
[SESAME](https://sesame.epfl.ch/main-page-en) is EPFL’s financial online portal.
You can find on this website many relevant information and possibilities, such as:

* Your monthly and yearly payment slips, including those necessary for tax declaration (Swiss nationals) or tax refunds (B permit holders, see section “Saving Money”)
* Reimbursement of professional expenses
* Camipro automatic monthly recharge directly from your salary
* Ordering of various professional material, with negotiated EPFL discounts

And many other possibilities.


