---
layout: post
title: "Swiss Culture and Languages"
date: 2021-08-30
category: life
order: 1
---

Switzerland is more or less divided into three cultural parts based on the regional languages spoken: 

A Swiss-German part (which comprises the majority of the Swiss population), a French-speaking, and an Italian-speaking part. What is important to know is that while we refer to the Swiss-German part as Swiss-"German", Swiss-German ("Schwitzerdütsch") as a language is quite different from the German spoken in Germany.

And in the same way there are some (small) language differences between the French spoken in France and in the regions around Lausanne. These differences are much smaller than between German and Swiss-German but they can still cause some confusion about whether you are having lunch (déjeuner in France/dîner in Switzerland) or dinner. 


Things to note:
* Sunday is a rest day in Switzerland. That means that...
  - ... most supermarkets & shops are closed. (There are still gas stations and small family-run shops open or supermarkets in the train station)
  - ... your neighbours will expect you not to do the laundry, use the vacuum cleaner, throw out the glass bin, or drill holes into your walls on Sundays.
* Punctuality is not a joke. Even for social events (like dinners) you are expected to be on time or slightly earlier. Conversely, it also means public transport is very on time.
* Try to keep the noise down in house parties or reunions, especially after 22h00. It is a thoughtful idea to let your neighbors know ahead of time that you are hosting a party. 
* Buy train tickets. You will very likely get controlled and get fined 100 CHF if you don’t have a ticket. 
