---
layout: post
title: "Semester projects"
date: 2021-08-10
category: first
order: 2
---

As a first year fellowship student, you are expected to do two semester projects, possibly in two different labs. You are the one responsible for meeting with professors and finding the right lab for yourself. Note that at the end of each semester, you will have to compile a report of your project and present it.

## First semester project
Being a fellowship student is a great opportunity to explore - but also somewhat stressful: finding the right professor and lab is not an easy task! If you’re already affiliated, you’re in a nice position - you don’t need to stress about finding a lab anymore.

For those who arrive newly at EPFL and don’t know where to work yet, try to know about 3-4 labs before coming that would be a good match for you. Get familiar with their latest publications (i.e. read abstract and intro ;-)), this shows that you’re sincerely interested. Contact professors directly to know about openings, sometimes websites might be out of date. Again, it’s good to get in touch before you arrive, so that you can set up meetings during the orientation weeks.

When you have found a potential match, talk to the current PhD students and other people from the lab. They are usually happy to talk about their experience in the lab in a more open way than what you get through official channels. Maybe you also want to know how long students usually take in this lab to finish their thesis and what they do after they graduate. Also, don’t be scared to ask the professors in a 1-to-1 meeting whether they could potentially hire you (if they have openings and/or funding) - it’s important for you to know, and if anything, it shows that you’re sincerely interested in their lab.

If you didn’t get any replies before coming, don’t panic! The purpose of the first couple of weeks is to get to know the labs and professors. A lot of information on lab choice is communicated at the EDIC Welcome Week during the first two weeks of September. If you arrive later, ask your colleagues for information and/or the EDIC staff for slides etc.

Take courses with professors who could be a potential match as advisor or co-advisor. That way, you can get to know them and their teaching/research style first-hand and maybe even impress them (or at least learn what they want you to know).

[List of EDIC Affiliated labs](https://www.epfl.ch/education/phd/edic-computer-and-communication-sciences/edic-computer-and-communication-sciences/edic-affiliated-labs-research-expertise/)

## Second semester project
Once you did your first semester project, it’s really ok to change labs! If you’re not happy, seize the opportunity to change after your first semester, it won’t jeopardize your thesis! Over the past four years, 30% of first-year fellowship students did their second project in a different lab.

You should know that no matter how much a professor likes you, if they don’t have openings, they won’t be able to hire you. If you feel like you found your perfect match after the first semester, make sure you discuss with the professors their willingness/ability of hiring you after the candidacy exam (if you haven’t already done so before starting, which is what we recommend). Some professors might choose a few students for semester projects and then only pick one for the PhD. This is not at all the purpose of EDIC semester projects and should not happen. If it does anyways, please get in touch with your student representatives / EDIC staff and/or your contact person.

A good advice is to directly ask your professor after the first semester project for a feedback session and evaluate the chances of that professor hiring you. If you think that the professor is not fully convinced, try another lab for the second semester project and that way you will have the opportunity to choose between both labs.

Also, it is possible for a professor to hire you after the first semester. This can be particularly interesting for non-IC professors, and is something you can bring up in a discussion. The paperwork should be handled by the hosting lab but EDIC must be informed about the lab transfer.

